---
layout: post
title: C++20 Coroutines and io_uring - Part 2/3
tags: [cpp]
related_posts:
  - _posts/2022-11-12-couring-1.md
  - _posts/2022-11-13-couring-3.md
---

In the [first part]({% post_url 2022-11-12-couring-1 %}) of the series we learned about io_uring by writing a program that reads and parses hundreds of OBJ files from disk. In this second part of the series we will rewrite that program of by making use of C++20 coroutines.

Even thought required basic concepts are explained, this post is not meant to be an in-depth dive into C++ coroutines, the goal is rather to showcase of how coroutines can be used together with `io_uring`. If you are not familiar with C++ coroutines yet, [Lewis Baker's blog series](https://lewissbaker.github.io/) is a great place to start.

# Basic Idea

What we want to do is simple: implement a coroutine that loads and parses an OBJ file from disk using `io_uring`. When this coroutine is called it pushes a submission request into the submission queue and suspends execution, returning to the caller. Once the corresponding completion entry has arrived the coroutine is resumed and the OBJ can be parsed:

```cpp
Task parseOBJFile(IOUring &uring, const ReadOnlyFile &file) {
  std::vector<char> buff(file.size());
  int status = co_await ReadFileAwaitable{uring, file, buff};
  // completion entry has arrived at this point
  // buffer has been filled and parsing can take place
  Result result{.status_code = 0, .file = file.path()};
  readObjFromBuffer(buff, result.result);
  co_return result;
}
```

This is our coroutine. It looks similar to a normal function, in fact, it's just good old imperative synchronous code: allocate a buffer, read contents of file into buffer, parse contents of buffer, return result.

The coroutine is naturally not executed synchronously: it suspends execution and yields control to the caller at predetermined locations. Most notably, at the await expression in the second line: `co_await ReadFileAwaitable{uring, file, buff}`. This is the point where the submission entry is pushed to the submission queue and control returns to the caller. `co_await` is an operator that is applied to an *awaitable* and suspends execution. `ReadFileAwaitable` is such an awaitable, its task is to suspend the coroutine and register it to be woken up in the future. Once the coroutine is resumed execution continues right after the `co_await` expression.

# Suspending Execution

`ReadFileAwaitable` is the awaitable we use used to suspend the coroutine. Don't be scared we will explain what's going on here:

```cpp
class ReadFileAwaitable {
public:
  ReadFileAwaitable(IOUring &uring, const ReadOnlyFile &file,
                    const std::vector<char> &buf) {
    sqe_ = io_uring_get_sqe(uring.get());
    io_uring_prep_read(sqe_, file.fd(), buf.data(), buf.size(), 0);
  }

  auto operator co_await() {
    struct Awaiter {
      io_uring_sqe *entry;
      RequestData requestData;

      Awaitable(io_uring_sqe *sqe) : entry{sqe} {}
      bool await_ready() { return false; }
      void await_suspend(std::coroutine_handle<> handle) noexcept {
        requestData.handle = handle;
        io_uring_sqe_set_data(entry, &requestData);
      }
      int await_resume() { return requestData.statusCode; }
    };
    return Awaiter{sqe_};
  }

private:
  io_uring_sqe *sqe_;
};
```

`ReadFileAwaitable` creates a submission queue entry and pushes it into the submission queue. This makes sense, as we must push the request into the queue before suspending the coroutine.

`Awaiter` has two member variables: `entry` and `requestData`. `entry` is a pointer to the submission entry, we need it to be able to attach user data to it with `io_uring_sqe_set_data`. User data is arbitrary data (literally a `void*`) that we can attach to a submission request. The user data is propagated by the kernel as-is to the corresponding completion entry and its usually used to uniquely distinguish a completion entry and link it to the corresponding submission request.

`ReadFileAwaitable` overloads `operator co_await()`, which returns an *awaiter*: `Awaiter`. `Awaiter` implements the required member functions dictated by the standard: `await_ready`, `await_suspend` and `await_resume`.

`await_ready` returns always `false`. This means that the coroutine will always be suspended on `co_await ReadFileAwaitable{}`. We could have also inherited from `std::suspend_always`.

Now we must implement `await_suspend`. This function is called right after the coroutine has been suspended and receives the coroutine handle as parameter. This is a great place to write the user data to the submission queue entry. But what should we write as user data?

Let's think for minute: we pushed a submission entry into the submission queue. There will be a corresponding completion entry arriving soon at the completion queue. Once the completion entry has arrived we must resume the coroutine that was just suspended. What do we need to resume the coroutine? The coroutine handle that has just been passed to us! Let's write the coroutine handle as user data into the submission request!

The coroutine handle is stored inside a member variable of `Awaiter`,`requestData` of type `RequestData`:

```cpp
struct RequestData {
  std::coroutine_handle<> handle;
  int statusCode{-1};
};
```

`RequestData` stores the coroutine handle and the status code of the read operation. The status code will be written to the `Awaiter` object later on, when the completion request has arrived. The user data is therefore a pointer to the `requestData` data member of the awaiter object.

Finally we can implement `await_resume`. `await_resume` is called right before the coroutine is resumed and returns the status code of the read operation. In other words, we can assume that `requestData.statuCode` has been initialized by the time `await_resume` is called.

The return value of `await_resume` is the result of the entire await expression, meaning that we can write:

```cpp
int status = co_await ReadFileAwaitable{}
if (!status) {
    // ...
}
```
as if it were a normal `read` call.

# Resuming Execution

Calling `co_await ReadFileAwaitable` puts the coroutine to sleep, but how do we wake it up? Easy, we wait for completion requests to arrive at the completion queue and after a completion entry has arrived we extract the coroutine handle inside it and use it to resume the coroutine:

```cpp
int consumeCQEntries(IOUring &uring) {
  int processed{0};
  io_uring_cqe *cqe;
  unsigned head; // head of the ring buffer, unused
  io_uring_for_each_cqe(uring.get(), head, cqe) {
    auto *request_data = static_cast<RequestData *>(io_uring_cqe_get_data(cqe));
    // make sure to set the status code before resuming the coroutine
    request_data->statusCode = cqe->res;
    request_data->handle.resume(); // await_resume is called here
    ++processed;
  }
  io_uring_cq_advance(uring.get(), processed);
  return processed;
}
```

Before resuming the coroutine we have to write the status code into `request_data`. `request_data` is a pointer to the `requestData` data member in the `Awaiter` object that is returned in `await_resume`.

We write now a `consumeCQEEntriesBlocking` helper function which submits pending submission entries to the kernel and blocks until at least one completion entry arrives:

```cpp
int consumeCQEntriesBlocking(IOUring &uring) {
  io_uring_submit_and_wait(uring.get(), 1); // blocks if queue empty
  return consumeCQEntries(uring);
}
```

We have learned the mechanics of suspending and resuming our coroutine, now we can write the client code that uses it to load the OBJ files.

Intuitively we must allocate some `std::vector` that contains the results returned by `parseOBJFile`, but what is the return type of `parseOBJFile`? What is the return type of a coroutine? It's a *coroutine type* called `Task`.

# Coroutine Type: Task

`Task` is the return type of our coroutine. We must implement it ourselves by defining the API demanded by the standard. Again, don't worry we will go through it:

```cpp
class Task {
public:
  struct promise_type {
    Result result;

    Task get_return_object() { return Task(this); }

    void unhandled_exception() noexcept {}

    void return_value(Result result) noexcept { result = std::move(result); }
    std::suspend_never initial_suspend() noexcept { return {}; }
    std::suspend_always final_suspend() noexcept { return {}; }
  };

  explicit Task(promise_type *promise)
      : handle_{HandleT::from_promise(*promise)} {}
  Task(Task &&other) : handle_{std::exchange(other.handle_, nullptr)} {}

  ~Task() {
    if (handle_) {
      handle_.destroy();
    }
  }

  Result getResult() const & {
    assert(handle_.done());
    return handle_.promise().result;
  }

  Result&& getResult() && {
    assert(handle_.done());
    return std::move(handle_.promise().result);
  }

  bool done() const { return handle_.done(); }

  using HandleT = std::coroutine_handle<promise_type>;
  HandleT handle_;
};
```

`Task` defines a promise type. The promise object is instantiated for every call to the coroutine and lives inside the coroutine frame. The promise object is used to transmit the result of the coroutine (or an exception if one is thrown inside the coroutine body). Hence, the promise type has a member `Result result`, which contains the final result of the parsing of an OBJ file:

```cpp
struct Result {
  tinyobj::ObjReader result; // stores the actual parsed obj
  int status_code{0};        // the status code of the read operation
  std::string file;          // the file the OBJ was loaded from
};
```

`result` is initialized from inside the member function `return_value`, which is called when the coroutine reaches an `co_return` statement.

`Task` defines a convenience member function `getResult()` that extracts and returns the result from the promise.

`promise_type` must define a member function `get_return_object` which returns the actual coroutine object. In our case its an instance of `Task`. `unhandled_exception` is called when the coroutine body throws, we left it unimplemented as we are exception free (or aim to be). `initial_suspend` and `final_suspend` determine the initial and final suspension behavior of the coroutine, whether the coroutine should start or finish in a suspended state or not.

`Task` contains the coroutine handle `handle_` and manages its lifetime: it destroys the coroutine frame in upon destruction by calling `handle_.destroy()`. It also defines a `done()` convenience member that tells whether the coroutine has finished executing.

C++20 coroutines are raw, this means that instead of being a finished cake, they are more like a bunch of flour, eggs and butter. In order to implement a coroutine you have to write a lot of supporting code and boilerplate, you must bake your own cake. For this reason it is usual to make use of a coroutine library like [cppcoro by Lewis Baker](https://github.com/lewissbaker/cppcoro), which implement generic version of our `Task` type, among a lot of more useful abstractions, greatly reducing the amount of boilerplate.

# Putting it all together

Now we can implement the top-level function that parses the OBJ files using coroutines:

```cpp
std::vector<Result> parseOBJFiles(const std::vector<ReadOnlyFile> &files) {
  IOUring uring{files.size()};
  std::vector<Task> tasks;
  tasks.reserve(files.size());
  for (const auto &file : files) {
    tasks.push_back(parseOBJFile(uring, file));
  }
  while (!allDone(tasks)) {
    // consume all entries in the submission queue
    // if the queue is empty block until the next completion arrives
    consumeCQEntriesBlocking(uring);
  }
  return gatherResults(tasks);
}
```

It allocates a vector of `Task`s by executing the `parseOBJFile` coroutine for each file. Note that  `initial_suspend` in `promise_type` returns `std::suspend_never`, this means that the `parseOBJFile` coroutine doesn't start suspended but right away continues execution until `co_await ReadFileAwaitable`, where the coroutine is suspended.

Once all coroutines are suspended and the kernel is doing its work, we don't have other option other than wait until some completion requests start appearing in the completion queue, `consumeCQEEntriesBlocking` wakes up the coroutines one-by-one as the corresponding completion entries start arriving.

`allDone` is a simple helper that checks if all coroutines have been fully executed to completion:

```cpp
bool allDone(const std::vector<Task> &tasks) {
  return std::all_of(tasks.cbegin(), tasks.cend(),
                     [](const auto &t) { return t.done(); });
}
```

Upon resumption coroutines parse the OBJ file and return the result with `co_return result;`.

Finally we can extract the final results from the finished coroutines:

```cpp
std::vector<Result> gatherResults(const std::vector<Task> &tasks) {
  std::vector<Result> results;
  results.reserve(tasks.size());
  for (auto &&t : tasks) {
    results.push_back(std::move(t).getResult());
  }
  return results;
}
```

At the end of the function's block scope, all `Task`s are destroyed, deallocating all coroutine frames.

# Closing Thoughts

You may be asking yourself: what is the actual point of all this is compared to the implementation without coroutines? Its a fair question. One may argue that we have just added unnecessary boilerplate to an already straight-forward implementation. Its also not particularly more efficient: we are stillperforming parsing sequentially in a single thread.

Luckily we are not done yet. See, the beauty of coroutines is that they are very composable. Once you a have a coroutine-based implementation adding more awaitables or other coroutines is child's play, they fit like lego stones.

In [part 3]({% post_url 2022-11-13-couring-3 %}) we will extend our coroutine-based implementation such that parsing is performed in parallel in a thread pool. This is were the real power of coroutines will come to light.
